book/using_the_terminal/basics.md, before:

# Basics 
*or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Terminal*


On this page you'll learn the basics of working from the **terminal** (a.k.a. the **shell**, a.k.a. the **command line**). Typing commands instead of the usual point-and-click may feel a bit clumsy and old-fashioned at first. But if you stick with it, you'll soon realize why the terminal is a standard tool for code developers, computational scientists and anyone else doing fancy stuff with computers.

For the examples below we will often need some dummy directories and files. To prepare these files and directories we'll provide one-line *preparation commands* that you can simply copy and paste into the terminal. To paste in the terminal, right-click or press **ctrl-shift-v** (Linux) or **cmd-c** (MacOS). To execute a command, simply hit 'enter'. 

Don't worry if you don't yet understand everything going on in these preparation commands --- you'll learn all of it soon. After each example we also provide a single-line command that deletes the dummy files we've just created.

We'll start by creating a directory `compphys_examples` in our home directory and go to that directory. This directory will be starting point for the examples below.

```sh
mkdir $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir $HOME/compphys_examples && cd $HOME/compphys_examples && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

```{note}
Don't miss the [keyboard shortcuts](sec:keyboard_shortcuts) --- they will make your life in the terminal much easier.
```


## Navigation 

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir navigate && cd navigate && mkdir emptydir dirA dirA/dirB && touch file1.txt dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The basic commands for finding your way around the system are `pwd`, `ls` and `cd`:

```sh
# Print the directory you're currently in (the 'working directory')
pwd

# List directory content
ls           # List content of the current directory
ls dirA      # List content of the directory 'dirA' 
ls -l        # A more detailed content list, with time stamps, file sizes, etc.
ls -lh       # Same as above, but with file sizes given in 'human readable' units

# Change directory
cd dirA                 # Move into directory 'dirA'
cd ..                   # Move back up one directory
cd dirA/dirB            # Move into directory 'dirA/dirB'
cd ../../               # Move up two directories
cd                      # Move directly to the home directory (typically /home/yourusername/)
cd ~                    # Same as above
cd $HOME                # Same as above 
cd /home/yourusername/compphys_examples  # Move to a directory using its full ('absolute') path
```
**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r navigate
```


## Copying, moving and renaming files and directories

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir copy_move_rename && cd copy_move_rename && mkdir emptydir dirA dirA/dirB && touch file1.txt dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The basic command for copying is `cp`, and the command for moving and renaming is `mv`. 

```sh
# If you get confused, use the 'pwd' and 'ls' commands to
# see where you are and what files/directories are present

# Copy files
cp file1.txt file1_copy.txt          # Make a copy of file1.txt in the current directory
cp file1.txt dirA/file1_copy.txt     # Make a second copy and place it in dirA

# Copy directories
cp -r dirA dirA_copy                 # Note the -r ('recursive') flag for copying directories

# Move files
mv file1.txt dirA/                   # Move file1.txt into the directory dirA

# Rename files and directories
mv file1_copy.txt file1_renamed.txt  # Rename file1_copy.txt to file1_renamed.txt
mv dirA_copy dirA_renamed            # Rename the directory dirA_copy to dirA_renamed
```
**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r copy_move_rename
```


## Deleting files and directories

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir delete && cd delete && mkdir emptydir dirA dirA/dirB && touch file1.txt dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The basic command for deleting stuff is `rm` (for *remove*). To remove an empty directory you can use `rmdir`.

```sh
rm file1.txt                            # Delete the file file1.txt
rm dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt   # Delete the two files dirA/file2.txt and dirA/dirB/file3.txt
rm -r dirA                              # Delete the entire directory dirA with all content (note the -r flag)
rmdir emptydir                          # Delete the empty directory emptydir
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r delete
```

```{note}
*With great power comes great responsibility!* If you delete or overwrite a file/directory by mistake, it is basically gone. (Unless it's a file that is tracked by `git` --- then it's very easy to restore it. You'll learn about that in the git section.) So it can be wise to take a second look before executing a `rm` or `mv` command. For instance, you *never ever* want to do the mistake of accidentally running the command `rm -r /`, which would delete *everything* your user has access to. Another dangerous example is `rm -r *`, which would delete everything in the current directory and all subdirectories --- so you want to make very sure you're in the correct directory... (See below for an explanation of the wildcard `*`.) 
```


## Using wildcards

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir wildcards && cd wildcards && mkdir dirA && touch file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt file11.txt file12.txt file13.txt dirA/file.txt dirA/bare.skrot dirA/tull.ball && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The wildcards `*`, `?` and `[]` allow you to perform commands on groups of files/directories. Wildcards can be used with all terminal commands. Here are some examples using the `ls`, `rm` and `mv` commands:

```sh
ls file*             # List files with names beginning with "file"
ls *.txt             # List files with names ending with ".txt"
ls f*.txt            # List files with names beginning with "f" and ending with ".txt"
ls file?.txt         # List files that match "file?.txt" where "?" can be any single character
ls file[123].txt     # List files named "file1.txt", "file2.txt" or "file3.txt"

rm dirA/*.txt        # Delete files in directory dirA with names ending with ".txt"
rm dirA/*            # Delete all files in dirA

mv *.txt dirA/       # Move files ending with ".txt" into the dirA directory
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r wildcards
```


## Viewing files

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir view_files && cd view_files && echo "Line number 1" > file1.txt && echo "Line number 2" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 3" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 4" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 5" >> file1.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

There are several commands for inspecting the content of files directly from the terminal. Below we demonstrate the commands `cat`, `head`, `tail` and `less`. (For a more in-depth explanation, see [here](https://i.redd.it/jlaxkglh1iw41.png).)

```sh
cat file1.txt        # Print the full content of file1.txt to the terminal screen
head -3 file1.txt    # Print the first 3 lines of file1.txt
tail -2 file1.txt    # Print the last 2 lines of file1.txt
less file1.txt       # View file1.txt interactively. Press 'q' to return to the terminal
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r view_files
```

```{note}
Viewing files like this only works for text-based (i.e. human readable) files. For files in some binary format, e.g. a compiled C++ program, you won't get sensible output from commands like `cat` and `less`. (Try it and see.)
```


## Run programs and scripts

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir run_programs run_programs/dirA && cd run_programs && echo "echo \"This program does nothing\" " > some_script.sh  && echo "echo \"This program also does nothing\" " > dirA/some_other_script.sh  && chmod u+x some_script.sh dirA/some_other_script.sh && echo "" &&  echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

To run an **executable** (a compiled C++ program, a shell script, etc.) we simply specify the path to the executable file and hit 'enter'. When the file lives in the current directory, we specify the directory with `./`:

```sh
./some_script.sh             # Run some_script.sh that lives in the current directory
dirA/some_other_script.sh    # Run some_other_script.sh that lives in the directory dirA
./dirA/some_other_script.sh  # Same as above
$HOME/compphys_examples/run_programs/some_script.sh   # Run a script using its full (absolute) path
```

If you write your own script, the file will not automatically be executable. You first have to change the **file mode** using the `chmod` command. Let's quickly demonstrate this using the `some_script.sh` script:


```sh
chmod a-x some_script.sh   # Remove the execution ('x') mode for *all* users ('a')
./some_script.sh           # This will now fail with a "permission denied" error
chmod u+x some_script.sh   # Add the execution mode only for the *owner* ('u'), which is you
./some_script.sh           # This will now work again
```

The `cmhod` command is the general command for used to set who has permission to read, write and/or execute files. You can see which permissions are set for a given file by listing it with the `ls -l` command and read the string of `r`, `w`, and `x` characters at the beginning of the output. If e.g. the command 

```sh
ls -l some_script.sh
```
outputs 

```
-rwxrw-r-- 1 youruser youruser 34 aug.  20 17:00 some_script.sh
```

the first three characters (`rwx`) after the `-` say that the **owner** has read, write and execute permissions, the next three characters (`rw-`) show that users in the same **group** as the owner have read and write permissions, and the final three characters (`r--`) say that **others** only have read permission.


**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r run_programs
```


## Write terminal output to file

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir write_to_file && cd write_to_file && echo "echo \"0.1423e+2  0.7123e+1  0.9423e+0  -0.8720e+1\" " > some_script.sh && chmod u+x some_script.sh && echo "" &&  echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The output from a command can be written to a file by using the `>` operator. This will *overwrite* any existing content in the output file. To *append* to an existing file, use the `>>` operator:

```sh
./some_script.sh                # Run some_script.sh. This just prints some dummy data to screen

./some_script.sh > mydata.dat   # Run some_script.sh and save the output in the file mydata.dat
cat mydata.dat                  # Check the content of mydata.dat

./some_script.sh > mydata.dat   # Run some_script.sh again. This *overwrites* the previous mydata.dat
./some_script.sh >> mydata.dat  # Run some_script.sh again, but *append* to the end of mydata.dat.
cat mydata.dat                  # mydata.dat should now contain two lines
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r write_to_file
```


## Search for files and directories

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir search && cd search && mkdir dirA dirA/dirB && touch a_file_with_dir_in_the_name.txt file1.txt dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

We can search for files and directories using the `find` command:

```sh
find . -name "*.txt"          # From the current directory ("."), search for any anything ending with ".txt"
find . -name "*dir*"          # From the current directory, search for anything with "dir" in the name
find . -type f -name "*dir*"  # Same as above, but only search for files
find . -type d -name "*dir*"  # Same as above, but only search for directories
find $HOME/compphys_examples -type d -name "*dir*"  # Use an absolute path to specify the starting point
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r search
```


## Search for file content

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir search_file_content && cd search_file_content && echo "Line number 1" > file1.txt && echo "Line number 2" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 3" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 4" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 5" >> file1.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The standard tool for searching trough text content is the `grep` command. Using `grep` to search is sometimes referred to simply as "grepping". Let's first download (this) dummy output from (this) dummy program to illustrate some basic `grep` functionality:

```sh
wget ...
```




**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r search_file_content
```



## Download files

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir download_files && cd download_files && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

If you have the URL you can download a file directly from the terminal with the `wget` command. Let's demonstrate it by downloading the markdown (`.md`) file that this page is built from:

```sh
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/anderkve/FYS3150/master/book/using_the_terminal/basics.md

less basics.md   # Take a look at the downloaded file
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r download_files
```


<!--

- [DONE] pwd
- [DONE] cd
- [DONE] ls
- [DONE] mv
- [DONE] rm
- [DONE] rmdir
- [DONE] cat
- [DONE] less
- [DONE] head
- [DONE] tail
- [DONE] wget
- [DONE] running a script or program
- [DONE] pass output to file ">"
- [DONE] append to file ">>"
- [DONE] find
- [DONE] chmod

- grep

- man

- history

- tar and zip


-->

Commit message:

Terminal section: more on grep
	modified:   book/using_the_terminal/basics.md

book/using_the_terminal/basics.md, after:

# Basics 
*or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Terminal*


On this page you'll learn the basics of working from the **terminal** (a.k.a. the **shell**, a.k.a. the **command line**). Typing commands instead of the usual point-and-click may feel a bit clumsy and old-fashioned at first. But if you stick with it, you'll soon realize why the terminal is a standard tool for code developers, computational scientists and anyone else doing fancy stuff with computers.

For the examples below we will often need some dummy directories and files. To prepare these files and directories we'll provide one-line *preparation commands* that you can simply copy and paste into the terminal. To paste in the terminal, right-click or press **ctrl-shift-v** (Linux) or **cmd-c** (MacOS). To execute a command, simply hit 'enter'. 

Don't worry if you don't yet understand everything going on in these preparation commands --- you'll learn all of it soon. After each example we also provide a single-line command that deletes the dummy files we've just created.

We'll start by creating a directory `compphys_examples` in our home directory and go to that directory. This directory will be starting point for the examples below.

```sh
mkdir $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir $HOME/compphys_examples && cd $HOME/compphys_examples && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

```{note}
Don't miss the [keyboard shortcuts](sec:keyboard_shortcuts) --- they will make your life in the terminal much easier.
```


## Navigation 

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir navigate && cd navigate && mkdir emptydir dirA dirA/dirB && touch file1.txt dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The basic commands for finding your way around the system are `pwd`, `ls` and `cd`:

```sh
# Print the directory you're currently in (the 'working directory')
pwd

# List directory content
ls           # List content of the current directory
ls dirA      # List content of the directory 'dirA' 
ls -l        # A more detailed content list, with time stamps, file sizes, etc.
ls -lh       # Same as above, but with file sizes given in 'human readable' units

# Change directory
cd dirA                 # Move into directory 'dirA'
cd ..                   # Move back up one directory
cd dirA/dirB            # Move into directory 'dirA/dirB'
cd ../../               # Move up two directories
cd                      # Move directly to the home directory (typically /home/yourusername/)
cd ~                    # Same as above
cd $HOME                # Same as above 
cd /home/yourusername/compphys_examples  # Move to a directory using its full ('absolute') path
```
**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r navigate
```


## Copying, moving and renaming files and directories

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir copy_move_rename && cd copy_move_rename && mkdir emptydir dirA dirA/dirB && touch file1.txt dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The basic command for copying is `cp`, and the command for moving and renaming is `mv`. 

```sh
# If you get confused, use the 'pwd' and 'ls' commands to
# see where you are and what files/directories are present

# Copy files
cp file1.txt file1_copy.txt          # Make a copy of file1.txt in the current directory
cp file1.txt dirA/file1_copy.txt     # Make a second copy and place it in dirA

# Copy directories
cp -r dirA dirA_copy                 # Note the -r ('recursive') flag for copying directories

# Move files
mv file1.txt dirA/                   # Move file1.txt into the directory dirA

# Rename files and directories
mv file1_copy.txt file1_renamed.txt  # Rename file1_copy.txt to file1_renamed.txt
mv dirA_copy dirA_renamed            # Rename the directory dirA_copy to dirA_renamed
```
**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r copy_move_rename
```


## Deleting files and directories

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir delete && cd delete && mkdir emptydir dirA dirA/dirB && touch file1.txt dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The basic command for deleting stuff is `rm` (for *remove*). To remove an empty directory you can use `rmdir`.

```sh
rm file1.txt                            # Delete the file file1.txt
rm dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt   # Delete the two files dirA/file2.txt and dirA/dirB/file3.txt
rm -r dirA                              # Delete the entire directory dirA with all content (note the -r flag)
rmdir emptydir                          # Delete the empty directory emptydir
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r delete
```

```{note}
*With great power comes great responsibility!* If you delete or overwrite a file/directory by mistake, it is basically gone. (Unless it's a file that is tracked by `git` --- then it's very easy to restore it. You'll learn about that in the git section.) So it can be wise to take a second look before executing a `rm` or `mv` command. For instance, you *never ever* want to do the mistake of accidentally running the command `rm -r /`, which would delete *everything* your user has access to. Another dangerous example is `rm -r *`, which would delete everything in the current directory and all subdirectories --- so you want to make very sure you're in the correct directory... (See below for an explanation of the wildcard `*`.) 
```


## Using wildcards

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir wildcards && cd wildcards && mkdir dirA && touch file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt file11.txt file12.txt file13.txt dirA/file.txt dirA/bare.skrot dirA/tull.ball && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The wildcards `*`, `?` and `[]` allow you to perform commands on groups of files/directories. Wildcards can be used with all terminal commands. Here are some examples using the `ls`, `rm` and `mv` commands:

```sh
ls file*             # List files with names beginning with "file"
ls *.txt             # List files with names ending with ".txt"
ls f*.txt            # List files with names beginning with "f" and ending with ".txt"
ls file?.txt         # List files that match "file?.txt" where "?" can be any single character
ls file[123].txt     # List files named "file1.txt", "file2.txt" or "file3.txt"

rm dirA/*.txt        # Delete files in directory dirA with names ending with ".txt"
rm dirA/*            # Delete all files in dirA

mv *.txt dirA/       # Move files ending with ".txt" into the dirA directory
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r wildcards
```


## Viewing files

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir view_files && cd view_files && echo "Line number 1" > file1.txt && echo "Line number 2" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 3" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 4" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 5" >> file1.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

There are several commands for inspecting the content of files directly from the terminal. Below we demonstrate the commands `cat`, `head`, `tail` and `less`. (For a more in-depth explanation, see [here](https://i.redd.it/jlaxkglh1iw41.png).)

```sh
cat file1.txt        # Print the full content of file1.txt to the terminal screen
head -3 file1.txt    # Print the first 3 lines of file1.txt
tail -2 file1.txt    # Print the last 2 lines of file1.txt
less file1.txt       # View file1.txt interactively. Press 'q' to return to the terminal
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r view_files
```

```{note}
Viewing files like this only works for text-based (i.e. human readable) files. For files in some binary format, e.g. a compiled C++ program, you won't get sensible output from commands like `cat` and `less`. (Try it and see.)
```


## Run programs and scripts

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir run_programs run_programs/dirA && cd run_programs && echo "echo \"This program does nothing\" " > some_script.sh  && echo "echo \"This program also does nothing\" " > dirA/some_other_script.sh  && chmod u+x some_script.sh dirA/some_other_script.sh && echo "" &&  echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

To run an **executable** (a compiled C++ program, a shell script, etc.) we simply specify the path to the executable file and hit 'enter'. When the file lives in the current directory, we specify the directory with `./`:

```sh
./some_script.sh             # Run some_script.sh that lives in the current directory
dirA/some_other_script.sh    # Run some_other_script.sh that lives in the directory dirA
./dirA/some_other_script.sh  # Same as above
$HOME/compphys_examples/run_programs/some_script.sh   # Run a script using its full (absolute) path
```

If you write your own script, the file will not automatically be executable. You first have to change the **file mode** using the `chmod` command. Let's quickly demonstrate this using the `some_script.sh` script:


```sh
chmod a-x some_script.sh   # Remove the execution ('x') mode for *all* users ('a')
./some_script.sh           # This will now fail with a "permission denied" error
chmod u+x some_script.sh   # Add the execution mode only for the *owner* ('u'), which is you
./some_script.sh           # This will now work again
```

The `cmhod` command is the general command for used to set who has permission to read, write and/or execute files. You can see which permissions are set for a given file by listing it with the `ls -l` command and read the string of `r`, `w`, and `x` characters at the beginning of the output. If e.g. the command 

```sh
ls -l some_script.sh
```
outputs 

```
-rwxrw-r-- 1 youruser youruser 34 aug.  20 17:00 some_script.sh
```

the first three characters (`rwx`) after the `-` say that the **owner** has read, write and execute permissions, the next three characters (`rw-`) show that users in the same **group** as the owner have read and write permissions, and the final three characters (`r--`) say that **others** only have read permission.


**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r run_programs
```


## Write terminal output to file

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir write_to_file && cd write_to_file && echo "echo \"0.1423e+2  0.7123e+1  0.9423e+0  -0.8720e+1\" " > some_script.sh && chmod u+x some_script.sh && echo "" &&  echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The output from a command can be written to a file by using the `>` operator. This will *overwrite* any existing content in the output file. To *append* to an existing file, use the `>>` operator:

```sh
./some_script.sh                # Run some_script.sh. This just prints some dummy data to screen

./some_script.sh > mydata.dat   # Run some_script.sh and save the output in the file mydata.dat
cat mydata.dat                  # Check the content of mydata.dat

./some_script.sh > mydata.dat   # Run some_script.sh again. This *overwrites* the previous mydata.dat
./some_script.sh >> mydata.dat  # Run some_script.sh again, but *append* to the end of mydata.dat.
cat mydata.dat                  # mydata.dat should now contain two lines
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r write_to_file
```


## Search for files and directories

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir search && cd search && mkdir dirA dirA/dirB && touch a_file_with_dir_in_the_name.txt file1.txt dirA/file2.txt dirA/dirB/file3.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

We can search for files and directories using the `find` command:

```sh
find . -name "*.txt"          # From the current directory ("."), search for any anything ending with ".txt"
find . -name "*dir*"          # From the current directory, search for anything with "dir" in the name
find . -type f -name "*dir*"  # Same as above, but only search for files
find . -type d -name "*dir*"  # Same as above, but only search for directories
find $HOME/compphys_examples -type d -name "*dir*"  # Use an absolute path to specify the starting point
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r search
```


## Search through file content

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir search_file_content && cd search_file_content && echo "Line number 1" > file1.txt && echo "Line number 2" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 3" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 4" >> file1.txt && echo "Line number 5" >> file1.txt && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

The standard tool for searching trough text content is the `grep` command. Using `grep` to search is sometimes referred to simply as "grepping". 
To illustrate this, let's download (this)[https://raw.githubusercontent.com/anderkve/FYS3150/master/book/using_the_terminal/extra_material/output.txt] program output from (this)[https://github.com/anderkve/FYS3150/blob/master/book/using_the_terminal/extra_material/random_program.py] dummy program and use `grep` to search through it:

```sh
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/anderkve/FYS3150/master/book/using_the_terminal/extra_material/output.txt  # Dowload the dummy program output
grep "Iteration" output.txt      # Search for and print all lines containing the word "Iteration"
grep -n "Iteration" output.txt   # Same as above, but include the line number
grep -ni "iteration" output.txt  # Same as above, but ignore differences  upper/lower case
grep "e+00" output.txt           # Find all numbers of power 10^0

```

The search strings for `grep` are based on so-called **regular expressions**, a technical topic that you can read more about (here)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression]. 


**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r search_file_content
```



## Download files

**Preparation command:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && mkdir download_files && cd download_files && echo "" && echo "current directory: $(pwd)" && echo ""
```

If you have the URL you can download a file directly from the terminal with the `wget` command. Let's demonstrate it by downloading the markdown (`.md`) file that this page is built from:

```sh
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/anderkve/FYS3150/master/book/using_the_terminal/basics.md

less basics.md   # Take a look at the downloaded file
```

**Remove example files:**
```sh
cd $HOME/compphys_examples && rm -r download_files
```


<!--

- [DONE] pwd
- [DONE] cd
- [DONE] ls
- [DONE] mv
- [DONE] rm
- [DONE] rmdir
- [DONE] cat
- [DONE] less
- [DONE] head
- [DONE] tail
- [DONE] wget
- [DONE] running a script or program
- [DONE] pass output to file ">"
- [DONE] append to file ">>"
- [DONE] find
- [DONE] chmod

- grep

- man

- history

- tar and zip


-->
