book/introduction_to_cpp/intro.md, before:

# Intro

In this part we will introduce the aspects of C++ that we'll encounter in this course. Our approach will be _learning by doing_ --- we'll mostly look at short, commented examples that you can (should!) try for yourself. 

Beyond this course page, there are approximately one gazillion online resources for learning C++. We encourage you to explore at least some of them!

Since many that follow this course will have experince with Python, we will often contrast and compare C++ to Python.

Before we jump in, here are some C++ facts you should know:

- In contrast to e.g. Python programs, C++ programs must be **compiled** and **linked** before they can be run. This is done using a tool called a **compiler**.

- The C++ language is based on the older C language. (C is effectively a subset of C++.) This means that C code will also work in C++ programs. But for our examples we will try to stick to C++-style code.

- C++ is a _very_ rich and powerful language. The drawback is that it can seem a bit complicated to begin with. But by mastering it, you probably also gain a deeper understanding of programming than you get from only using Python.

- Like other programming languages, C++ is evolving, with new features being added to the language for every new "version" (**standard**) of the language. In our code examples we will follow the "C++11" standard. (The most common standards are C++98, C++03, C++11, C++14, C++17, C++20.)

<!--
- If you come from Python, you will soon realise that C++ is very picky about **variable types** and **scopes**. This might seem frustrating, but often helps you to more quickly spot problems in your program design.
-->

Now, let's look at some code!

Commit message:

Additions to the C++ pages: more about variables.

book/introduction_to_cpp/intro.md, after:

# Intro

In this part we will introduce the aspects of C++ that we'll encounter in this course. Our approach will be _learning by doing_ --- we'll mostly look at short, commented examples that you can (should!) try for yourself. 

Beyond this course page, there are approximately one gazillion online resources for learning C++. We encourage you to explore at least [some](online_resources.md) of them!

Since many that follow this course will have experince with Python, we will often contrast and compare C++ to Python.

Before we jump in, here are some C++ facts you should know:

- In contrast to e.g. Python programs, C++ programs must be **compiled** and **linked** before they can be run. This is done using a tool called a **compiler**.

- Compared to Python, C++ is much more strict when it comes to **variable types**.

- The C++ language is based on the older C language. (C is effectively a subset of C++.) This means that C code will also work in C++ programs. But for our examples we will try to stick to C++-style code.

- C++ is a _very_ rich and powerful language. The drawback is that it can seem a bit complicated to begin with. But by mastering it, you probably also gain a deeper understanding of programming than you get from only using Python.

- Like other programming languages, C++ is evolving, with new features being added to the language for every new "version" (**standard**) of the language. In our code examples we will follow the "C++11" standard. (The most common standards are C++98, C++03, C++11, C++14, C++17, C++20.)

<!--
- If you come from Python, you will soon realise that C++ is very picky about **variable types** and **scopes**. This might seem frustrating, but often helps you to more quickly spot problems in your program design.
-->

Now, let's look at some code!


In C++ this would have to be two different variables, one declared to be of type `int` and one declared to be of type `string`.
