book/getting_ready/mac_users.md, before:

# Mac users

Here we'll add info to help Mac users get their system set up for this course.

Installation of software for C++ can be a little bit of a hazzle on macOS. This page will walk you through the process, step-by-step.

## Installation of basic software

1. First install *Xcode* from the app store. This contains the basic building blocks we need. It installs *git* and *Make* for us.

2. Now we'll install a *package manager* which we'll use install many other packages. Go to [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) and follow the installation instruction there. It's easy, just copy the link they provide there and run it in your terminal.


3. Now, run the following command in your terminal
    ```sh
    brew install gcc cmake
    ```

4. Now we need to do some simple sorcery.
  - Go to [Armadillo](http://arma.sourceforge.net) and hit the *download* button.
  - Go into your terminal and type
    ```sh
    cd ~/Downloads
    ```
  - Copy and run the following command.
    ```sh
    tar -xf *armadillo* && rm *.tar.xz && cd *armadillo*
    ```

  - Now run (If this step fails, please let us know so we can update the step-by-step guide)
    ```sh
    cp -r include/armadillo include/armadillo_bits /opt/homebrew/Cellar/gcc/11.2.0/include/c++/11.1.0
    ```
  - Finally run
    ```sh
    cd .. && rm -r *armadillo*
    ```

    If you did this *exactly* the way it's explained here, you should now have g++-11 (a compiler) and Armadillo (a linear algebra package for c++) installed on your mac.




## Additional useful command line tools

There's a plethora of useful command line tools for macOS that can be useful.

1. *wget* and *curl* are command line tools that allow you to download from the web using the command line.

2. *htop* is a powerful task manager that also displays the work each thread uses graphically in your terminal. This is a useful tool when you're code is parallelized (later in the course) so that you can monitor the work each thread does.

3. *tree* is a convenient tool to display files and directories in the terminal.


To install these, simply run

```sh
brew install wget curl htop tree
```

Commit message:

Changed macos intro + more git. Added some on openmp

book/getting_ready/mac_users.md, after:

# Mac users

Here we'll add info to help Mac users get their system set up for this course.

Installation of software for C++ can be a little bit of a hazzle on macOS. This page will walk you through the process, step-by-step.

## Installation of basic software

1. First install *Xcode* from the app store. This contains the basic building blocks we need. It installs *git* and *Make* and a few other command line tools.

2. Now we'll install a *package manager* which we'll use install many other packages. Go to [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) and follow the installation instruction there. It's easy, just copy the link they provide there and run it in your terminal.


3. Now, run the following command in your terminal
    ```sh
    brew install armadillo libomp
    ```
    

## Additional useful command line tools

There's a plethora of useful command line tools for macOS that can be useful.

1. *wget* and *curl* are command line tools that allow you to download from the web using the command line.

2. *htop* is a powerful task manager that also displays the work each thread uses graphically in your terminal. This is a useful tool when you're code is parallelized (later in the course) so that you can monitor the work each thread does.

3. *tree* is a convenient tool to display files and directories in the terminal.


To install these, simply run

```sh
brew install wget curl htop tree
```
