book/projects/project5.md, before:

# Project 5

```{note}
Apologies for the delay in completing the project description. It will be completed today, Monday 29 November. Stay tuned!
```

## Practicalities

- **Deadline**: Monday, December 13, 23:59.
- **Format:**
  - A scientific report, typeset in LaTeX, delivered as a pdf file on Canvas.
  - Code (with comments, of course) on a GitHub repo, with the repo link provided in your report.
  - You *must* deliver via your group on Canvas (even if you are working alone).

- **Collaboration:** We strongly encourage you to collaborate with others, in groups of up to four students. The group hands in a single pdf. Remember to list everyone's name in the pdf.

- **Reproducibility:** Your code should be available on a GitHub repo. You can refer to relevant parts of your code in your answers. Make sure to include a README file in the repo that briefly explains how the code is organized, and how it should be compiled and run in order for others to reproduce your results.

- **Figures:** Figures included in your LaTeX document should preferrably be made as vector graphics (e.g. `.pdf` files), rather than raster graphics (e.g. `.png` files).


## Introduction

The goal of this project is to simulate the two-dimensional time-dependent Schrödinger equation, and use it to study a double-slit-in-a-box setup and variations thereof. In short, you will write a simulation that can give results [`like this`](https://www.dropbox.com/s/76sdq2ecp0ekiin/animation.mp4?dl=0). (Note that you will not be required to animate your results, but it's quite instructive and fun to do so.)

The key methodological aspects of the projects are:
- Understanding partial differential equations (PDEs)
- Applying the Crank-Nicholson method in 2+1 dimensions
- Working with complex numbers in code
- Getting them indices straight...
- Using conserved quantities as stability checks

## The Schrödinger equation

The general formulation of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation is 

$$
i \hbar \frac{d}{dt} |\Psi\rangle = \hat{H} |\Psi\rangle,
$$

where $\hat{H}$ is some Hamiltonian operator and $|\Psi\rangle$ is the quantum state ([whatever that is](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-issues/#OntoIssu)). While we're not really sure what the quantum state *is*, we do know it is related to probability ([whatever that is](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/probability-interpret/)) through the [Born rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Born_rule), which we will use extensively in this project. More details below.


We will now consider the case of a *a single, non-relativistic particle in two dimensions*. If we work in "position space", the quantum state $|\Psi\rangle$ can then be expressed as a *complex valued* function $\Psi(x,y,t)$, historically called the *the wave function*. The Schrödinger equation then becomes

$$
i \hbar \frac{\partial}{\partial t} \Psi(x,y,t) = -\frac{\hbar^2}{2m} \left( \frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2}{\partial y^2} \right) \Psi(x,y,t) + V(x,y,t) \Psi(x,y,t).
$$

Here the terms $-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m} \frac{\partial^2 \Psi}{\partial x^2}$ and $-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m} \frac{\partial^2 \Psi}{\partial y^2}$ are expressions of the kinetic energy, corresponding to $\frac{p^2}{2m}$ from classical physics, with $m$ being the particle mass. The external environment is encoded in *the potential* $V$. We will only consider the case of a *time-independent* potential, $V = V(x,y)$.

When working in position space like this, the Born rule takes the form

$$
p(x,y\,;t) = |\Psi(x,y,t)|^2 = \Psi^*(x,y,t) \, \Psi(x,y,t),
$$

where $p(x,y\,;t)$ denotes the probability density for detecting the particle at position $(x,y)$ if we perform a position measurement at time $t$. 


To keep things simple, we will in this project assume that all dimensionful variables have been scaled away, leaving us with a "bare" Schrödinger equation on the form

$$
i \frac{\partial u}{\partial t} = -\frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial x^2} - \frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial y^2} + v(x,y) u.
$$ (schr_eq)

So in this equation *all the variables are dimensionless*, which means you do not have to worry about units for this project. Our goal is to solve equation {eq}`schr_eq` numerically to determine the evolution of the "wave function" $u(x,y,t)$ in the presence of some potential $v(x.y)$.

In our new notation the Born rule takes the form

$$
p(x,y;t) = |u(x,y,t)|^2 = u^*(x,y,t) \, u(x,y,t).
$$

assuming the wave function $u(x,y,t)$ has been properly normalized.



## Notation

Below we define the basic notation we will use for this project. 

- $x \in [0,1]$, $y \in [0,1]$, $t \in [0,T]$.
- We'll use equal an equal step size $h$ in both the $x$ and $y$ directions.
- $x \rightarrow x_i = i h$, with $i = 0, 1, \ldots, M-1$. (Don't confuse this index $i$ with the imaginary unit $i$ appearing in the Schrödinger equation!)
- $y \rightarrow y_j = j h$, with $j = 0, 1, \ldots, M-1$.
- $t \rightarrow t_n = n \Delta t$, with $n = 0, 1, \ldots, N_t-1$.
- $u(x,y,t) \rightarrow u(ih,jh,n \Delta t) \equiv u_{ij}^n$. Note that the superscript $n$ here is simply a time index --- we have not raised $u_{ij}$ to the $n$-th power!
- The matrix $U^n$ is a matrix with elements $u_{ij}^n$.
- $v(x,y) \rightarrow v(ih,jh) \equiv v_{ij}$.
- The matrix $V$ is a matrix with elements $v_{ij}$.

Note:

- $M$ is the number of *points* along the $x$ axis, including the boundary points. Thus, the $x$ axis has been discretized using $M-1$ *steps*, and there are $M-2$ "internal points" $x_1, \ldots, x_{M-2}$, i.e. excluding the boundary points $x_0$ and $x_{M-1}$.
- Similarly for the $y$ axis, again with $M$ being the number of *points*.
- We will mix index notation with and without commas as needed for clarity. So keep in mind that e.g. $u_{ij}$ and $u_{i,j}$ mean the same thing.


## Intial and boundary conditions

Throughout this project we will assume Dirichlet boundary conditions in the $xy$ plane:

- $u(x=0, y, t) = 0$
- $u(x=1, y, t) = 0$
- $u(x, y=0, t) = 0$
- $u(x, y=1, t) = 0$

This assumption simplifies the implemention of the Crank-Niocolson scheme quite a bit, so keep in mind that the code we write will have this assumption baked in from the beginning.

For the initial wave function $u(x,y,t=0)$ we will typically use a quantum mechanical Gaussian wavepacket, to be specified in the problems below.


## Problems

### Problem 0

Not really a problem but an advice: Before diving into this project, take a look at the [Armadillo documentation](http://arma.sourceforge.net/docs.html) to see how you can work with complex numbers. For instance, look up terms like `cx_double`, `cx_vec`, `cx_mat`, etc. 

In practice, this simply means having your Armadillo objects filled with the standard `std::complex<double>` type in C++. You should read about that [here](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/complex) and take a look at the examples. 

PS: You might also find `sp_cx_mat` in Armadillo very useful at some point...


### Problem 1

Show analytically that by discretizing equation {eq}`schr_eq` according to the Crank-Nicolson approach, you end up with the expression

$$
u_{ij}^{n+1}  -  r \left[u_{i+1,j}^{n+1} - 2u_{ij}^{n+1} + u_{i-1,j}^{n+1}\right]  -  r \left[u_{i,j+1}^{n+1} - 2u_{ij}^{n+1} + u_{i,j-1}^{n+1}\right]  +  \frac{i \Delta t}{2} v_{ij} u_{ij}^{n+1} \\
= u_{ij}^n  +  r \left[u_{i+1,j}^n - 2u_{ij}^n + u_{i-1,j}^n\right]  +  r \left[u_{i,j+1}^n - 2u_{ij}^n + u_{i,j-1}^n\right]  -  \frac{i \Delta t}{2} v_{ij} u_{ij}^n,
$$ (CN_eq1)

where $r \equiv \frac{i \Delta t}{2 h^2}$.


### Problem 2

One of the tricky things when implementing Crank-Nicolson with two spatial dimensions is getting the matrices and all the different indices right. When taking into account our choice of simple boundary conditions, equation {eq}`CN_eq1` can be expressed in matrix form as 

$$
A \,\vec{u}^{n+1} = B \,\vec{u}^{n}.
$$ (CN_eq2)

Here the vector $\vec{u}^n$ (and similarly $\vec{u}^{n+1}$) is a column vector that contains the $u_{ij}$ values for *all the internal points* of the $xy$ grid at time step $n$. In row-form it would look like this:

$$
\vec{u}^n = \left[(u_{1,1}^n, u_{2,1}^n, \ldots, u_{M-2,1}^n), (u_{1,2}^n, u_{2,2}^n, \ldots u_{M-2,2}^n), \ldots, (u_{1,M-2}^n \ldots u_{M-2,M-2}^n)\right].
$$

The parentheses are just added to make it clear where there is a change in the second index $j$. Thus the $\vec{u}$ vectors have length $(M-2)^2$, and the matrices $A$ and $B$ are thus (potentially very large) matrices of size $(M-2)^2 \times (M-2)^2$. 

Now we need some code to help us get this straight in our program:

- Write a code snippet that translates a pair of indices $(i,j)$ into a corresponding single index $k$ that gives the position of $u_{ij}$ in the vector $\vec{u}$.

- Start with $(M-2)=3$ as a concrete example and write a code snippet that can take a number $r$ and two lenght-9 vectors $\vec{a}$ and $\vec{b}$ and produce the following matrices:

  $$
  A = 
  \begin{bmatrix}
  a_0 &  -r  &  0   &  -r   &   0   &  0    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  -r  &  a_1 &  -r  &  0    &   -r  &  0    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  0   &  -r  &  a_2 &  0    &   0   &  -r   &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  -r  &  0   &  0   &  a_3  &   -r  &  0    &  -r  &  0    &  0    \\
  0   &  -r  &  0   &  -r   &   a_4 &  -r   &  0   &  -r   &  0    \\
  0   &  0   &  -r  &  0    &   -r  &  a_5  &  0   &  0    &  -r   \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  -r   &   0   &  0    &  a_6 &  -r   &  0    \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  0    &   -r  &  0    &  -r  &  a_7  &  -r   \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  0    &   0   &  -r   &  0   &  -r   &  a_8  \\
  \end{bmatrix}
  $$

  $$
  B = 
  \begin{bmatrix}
  b_0 &  r   &  0   &  r    &   0   &  0    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  r   &  b_1 &  r   &  0    &   r   &  0    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  0   &  r   &  b_2 &  0    &   0   &  r    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  r   &  0   &  0   &  b_3  &   r   &  0    &  r   &  0    &  0    \\
  0   &  r   &  0   &  r    &   b_4 &  r    &  0   &  r    &  0    \\
  0   &  0   &  r   &  0    &   r   &  b_5  &  0   &  0    &  r    \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  r    &   0   &  0    &  b_6 &  r    &  0    \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  0    &   r   &  0    &  r   &  b_7  &  r    \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  0    &   0   &  r    &  0   &  r    &  b_8  \\
  \end{bmatrix}
  $$

  If you look closely you will see that the matrix structure is based on submatrices of size $(M-2) \times (M-2)$. Make sure your code works for a general value of $(M-2)$, even though we're testing it for the simple case $(M-2)=3$.

- Now you are ready to write a function for your program that, using inputs $M$, $h$, $\Delta t$ and the matrix $V$ as input, can fill two $(M-2)^2 \times (M-2)^2$ matrices $A$ and $B$ according to the above pattern, with

  $$
  a_k &= 1 + 4r + \frac{i \Delta t}{2} v_{ij},\\
  b_k &= 1 - 4r - \frac{i \Delta t}{2} v_{ij}.
  $$

  (Here the $i$ in $i \Delta t$ is again the imaginary unit.)



### Problem 3

When we have the matrices $A$ and $B$, finding the next $\vec{u}^{n+1}$ from the current $\vec{u}^n$ in a time loop can be done in two steps:

  1. Perform the matrix multiplication $B \, \vec{u}^n = \vec{b}$.

  2. Solve the matrix equation $A \, \vec{u}^{n+1} = \vec{b}$ for the unknown $\vec{u}^{n+1}$.

Given what you know about matrix $A$, discuss which approaches might be well-suited to solve $A \, \vec{u}^{n+1} = \vec{b}$. For your code you can either implement a solver yourself or use a built-in solver in Armadillo.


### Problem 4

Write a part of your program that can set up the initial state $u_{ij}^0$ based on the following expression for an unnormalised Gaussian wave packet

$$
u(x,y,t=0) = e^{-\frac{(x-x_c)^2}{2 \sigma_x^2} - \frac{(y-y_c)^2}{2 \sigma_y^2} + i p_x (x-x_c) + i p_y (x-x_c)}.
$$
  
Here $x_c$ and $y_c$ are the coordinates of the centre of the initial wave packet, $\sigma_x$ and $\sigma_y$ are the initial widths of the wave packet in the $x$ and $y$ directions, and $p_x$ and $p_y$ are the wave packet momenta.

Make sure that the initial state $u_{ij}^0$ satisfies the boundary conditions. 

Also, add code that normalizes your initial state such that 

$$
\sum\limits_{i,j} u_{ij}^* u_{ij} = 1,
$$

i.e. that the total probability in our 2D probability distribution $p_{ij} = u_{ij}^* u_{ij}$ starts out normalized to 1.


### Problem 5

Write a part of your program that initializes the potential $V$. To construct the barriers used for the double-slit (and other configurations) we will simply set the elements $v_{ij}$ of $V$ that correspond to points inside the barriers to some high constant value $v_{ij} = v_0$. As our starting point we will use the following double-slit setup:

- Wall thickness: 0.02
- Wall position in the $x$ direction: 0.5
- Slit separation in the $y$ direction, i.e. distance between the inner edges of the two slits: 0.05
- Slit aperature, i.e. opening width i the $y$ direction: 0.05

(In Problem 9 you will also use single-slit and triple-slit configurations.)


### Problem 6

Put everything together into a program that does (at least) the following:

1. Set the simulation parameters. It may be useful to read some or all of these as command-line input, or from an input file. The main simulation parameters are $h$, $\Delta t$, $T$, $x_c$, $\sigma_x$, $p_x$, $y_c$, $\sigma_y$, $p_y$ and $v_0$. 

2. Set up the potential matrix, $V$. 

3. Set up the initial state matrix, $U^0$.

4. Set up the matrices $A$ and $B$ required by the Crank-Nicolson approach.

5. Run the time loop and store each new state $U^n$. You can either write every new state directly to file during the loop, or store them in memory and write everything to file after the loop. (Armadillo's `cx_cube` might be useful.)



### Problem 7

The total probability ($= 1$) in the probability distribution $p_{ij} = u_{ij}^* u_{ij}$ should be conserved over time. This is a nice consistency check to make sure your code works as it should.

- First run your simulation with the settings $h = 5\times10^{-3}$, $\Delta t = 2.5\times10^{-5}$, $T = 8\times10^{-3}$, $x_c = 0.25$, $\sigma_x = 0.05$, $p_x = 200$, $y_c = 0.5$, $\sigma_y = 0.05$, $p_y = 0$ and $v_0 = 0$, i.e. without any double-slit barrier.

- Make a plot of the deviation of the total probability from 1.0 as a function of time. (If the deviations are too small to be visible in your plot, consider plotting the data in a different way...)

- Run the simulation again, but now with a double-slit barrier switched on. Use $v_0 = 1\times10^10$ and the double-slit configuration from Problem 5, and make the initial state broader in the $y$-direction by setting $\sigma_y = 0.10$.

- Make a similar plot of the deviation of the total probability from 1.0 as a function of time.



### Problem 8

Run your simulation with the following settings **[to be added]**. 

- Make (at least) three colourmap plots that illustrate the time evolution of the 2D probability distribution given by $p_{ij} = u_{ij}^* u_{ij}$.

- For the same time steps, also make colourmap plots that show $\text{Re}(u_{ij})$ and $\text{Im}(u_{ij})$.

```{note}
When making the colourmap plots, it may be beneficial to not use $p_{ij}$ as the $z$ axis (colour) value, but rather some tranformation of $p_{ij}$, to more clearly see the structures in the probability distribution. But regardless of your choice, make sure to specify exactly what quantity the colour scale shows.
```


### Problem 9

- Run your simulation with the following settings **[to be added]**. Make a plot of the 1D probability distribution for detecting the particle along a strip near the right-hand wall (i.e. the screen position in a normal double-slit experiment).

- Adjust your code to also simulate single-slit and triple-slit experiments. Run your simulations with the following settings **[to be added]**. Plot similar 1D probability distributions as in the previous problem, i.e. 1D probability distributions along the right-hand wall.


### Problem X

If you find it useful, feel free to make some animations of your simulation and put links to these in your report! (However, don't overdo it --- your report will be more readable if the reader doesn't have to switch between the report and watching animations all the time.)


<!-- 
### Problem ?

Run your simulation with the following settings **[to be added]** and for a total time of **[to be added]**. Make a plot that shows the probability of detecting the particle in the left half of the box, $Prob(\text{detect particle in region} x < 0.5)$, as a function of time. 
 -->


### Code snippets

Here we might add suggestions for code layout, and some short code snippets.


<!-- 

$$
A = 
\begin{bmatrix}
a_0 & -r  &  0   & 0      &     -r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
-r  & a_1 & -r   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   & -r  &  a_2 & -r     &     0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  -r  & a_3    &     0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
-r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &     a_4 & -r  &  0   & 0      &     -r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &     -r  & a_5 & -r   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  a_6 & -r     &     0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &     0   &  0  &  -r  & a_7    &     0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     -r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &     a_8 & -r  &  0   & 0      &   -r  &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &     -r  & a_9 & -r   & 0      &   0   & -r  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  a_{10} & -r  &   0   &  0  & -r      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &     0   &  0  &  -r  & a_{11} &   0   &  0  &  0      & -r      \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     -r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &   a_{12} & -r  &  0   & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &   -r  & a_{13} & -r   & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &   0   & -r  &  a_{14} & -r      \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &   0   &  0  &  -r     & a_{15}  \\
\end{bmatrix}

$$

 -->

Commit message:

Added all remaining important details on Project 5. Might still add some code snippets and hints, if needed.
	modified:   book/projects/project5.md

book/projects/project5.md, after:

# Project 5

```{note}
The project description is now ready. But check back regularly for small updates, typo fixes and hints.
```

## Practicalities

- **Deadline**: Monday, December 13, 23:59.
- **Format:**
  - A scientific report, typeset in LaTeX, delivered as a pdf file on Canvas.
  - Code (with comments, of course) on a GitHub repo, with the repo link provided in your report.
  - You *must* deliver via your group on Canvas (even if you are working alone).

- **Collaboration:** We strongly encourage you to collaborate with others, in groups of up to four students. The group hands in a single pdf. Remember to list everyone's name in the pdf.

- **Reproducibility:** Your code should be available on a GitHub repo. You can refer to relevant parts of your code in your answers. Make sure to include a README file in the repo that briefly explains how the code is organized, and how it should be compiled and run in order for others to reproduce your results.

- **Figures:** Figures included in your LaTeX document should preferrably be made as vector graphics (e.g. `.pdf` files), rather than raster graphics (e.g. `.png` files).


## Introduction

The goal of this project is to simulate the two-dimensional time-dependent Schrödinger equation, and use it to study a double-slit-in-a-box setup and variations thereof. In short, you will write a simulation that can give results [`like this`](https://www.dropbox.com/s/76sdq2ecp0ekiin/animation.mp4?dl=0). (Note that you will not be required to animate your results, but it's quite instructive and fun to do so.)

The key methodological aspects of the projects are:
- Understanding partial differential equations (PDEs)
- Applying the Crank-Nicholson method in 2+1 dimensions
- Working with complex numbers in code
- Getting them indices straight...
- Using conserved quantities as stability checks

## The Schrödinger equation

The general formulation of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation is 

$$
i \hbar \frac{d}{dt} |\Psi\rangle = \hat{H} |\Psi\rangle,
$$

where $\hat{H}$ is some Hamiltonian operator and $|\Psi\rangle$ is the quantum state ([whatever that is](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-issues/#OntoIssu)). While we're not really sure what the quantum state *is*, we do know it is related to probability ([whatever that is](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/probability-interpret/)) through the [Born rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Born_rule), which we will use extensively in this project. More details below.


We will now consider the case of a *a single, non-relativistic particle in two dimensions*. If we work in "position space", the quantum state $|\Psi\rangle$ can then be expressed as a *complex valued* function $\Psi(x,y,t)$, historically called the *the wave function*. The Schrödinger equation then becomes

$$
i \hbar \frac{\partial}{\partial t} \Psi(x,y,t) = -\frac{\hbar^2}{2m} \left( \frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2}{\partial y^2} \right) \Psi(x,y,t) + V(x,y,t) \Psi(x,y,t).
$$

Here the terms $-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m} \frac{\partial^2 \Psi}{\partial x^2}$ and $-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m} \frac{\partial^2 \Psi}{\partial y^2}$ are expressions of the kinetic energy, corresponding to $\frac{p^2}{2m}$ from classical physics, with $m$ being the particle mass. The external environment is encoded in *the potential* $V$. We will only consider the case of a *time-independent* potential, $V = V(x,y)$.

When working in position space like this, the Born rule takes the form

$$
p(x,y\,;t) = |\Psi(x,y,t)|^2 = \Psi^*(x,y,t) \, \Psi(x,y,t),
$$

where $p(x,y\,;t)$ denotes the probability density for detecting the particle at position $(x,y)$ if we perform a position measurement at time $t$. 


To keep things simple, we will in this project assume that all dimensionful variables have been scaled away, leaving us with a "bare" Schrödinger equation on the form

$$
i \frac{\partial u}{\partial t} = -\frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial x^2} - \frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial y^2} + v(x,y) u.
$$ (schr_eq)

So in this equation *all the variables are dimensionless*, which means you do not have to worry about units for this project. Our goal is to solve equation {eq}`schr_eq` numerically to determine the evolution of the "wave function" $u(x,y,t)$ in the presence of some potential $v(x.y)$.

In our new notation the Born rule takes the form

$$
p(x,y;t) = |u(x,y,t)|^2 = u^*(x,y,t) \, u(x,y,t).
$$

assuming the wave function $u(x,y,t)$ has been properly normalized.



## Notation

Below we define the basic notation we will use for this project. 

- $x \in [0,1]$, $y \in [0,1]$, $t \in [0,T]$.
- We'll use equal an equal step size $h$ in both the $x$ and $y$ directions.
- $x \rightarrow x_i = i h$, with $i = 0, 1, \ldots, M-1$. (Don't confuse this index $i$ with the imaginary unit $i$ appearing in the Schrödinger equation!)
- $y \rightarrow y_j = j h$, with $j = 0, 1, \ldots, M-1$.
- $t \rightarrow t_n = n \Delta t$, with $n = 0, 1, \ldots, N_t-1$.
- $u(x,y,t) \rightarrow u(ih,jh,n \Delta t) \equiv u_{ij}^n$. Note that the superscript $n$ here is simply a time index --- we have not raised $u_{ij}$ to the $n$-th power!
- The matrix $U^n$ is a matrix with elements $u_{ij}^n$.
- $v(x,y) \rightarrow v(ih,jh) \equiv v_{ij}$.
- The matrix $V$ is a matrix with elements $v_{ij}$.

Note:

- $M$ is the number of *points* along the $x$ axis, including the boundary points. Thus, the $x$ axis has been discretized using $M-1$ *steps*, and there are $M-2$ "internal points" $x_1, \ldots, x_{M-2}$, i.e. excluding the boundary points $x_0$ and $x_{M-1}$.
- Similarly for the $y$ axis, again with $M$ being the number of *points*.
- We will mix index notation with and without commas as needed for clarity. So keep in mind that e.g. $u_{ij}$ and $u_{i,j}$ mean the same thing.


## Intial and boundary conditions

Throughout this project we will assume Dirichlet boundary conditions in the $xy$ plane:

- $u(x=0, y, t) = 0$
- $u(x=1, y, t) = 0$
- $u(x, y=0, t) = 0$
- $u(x, y=1, t) = 0$

This assumption simplifies the implemention of the Crank-Niocolson scheme quite a bit, so keep in mind that the code we write will have this assumption baked in from the beginning.

For the initial wave function $u(x,y,t=0)$ we will typically use a quantum mechanical Gaussian wavepacket, to be specified in the problems below.


## Problems

### Problem 0

Not really a problem but an advice: Before diving into this project, take a look at the [Armadillo documentation](http://arma.sourceforge.net/docs.html) to see how you can work with complex numbers. For instance, look up terms like `cx_double`, `cx_vec`, `cx_mat`, etc. 

In practice, this simply means having your Armadillo objects filled with the standard `std::complex<double>` type in C++. You should read about that [here](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/complex) and take a look at the examples. 

PS: You might also find `sp_cx_mat` in Armadillo very useful at some point...


### Problem 1

Show analytically that by discretizing equation {eq}`schr_eq` according to the Crank-Nicolson approach, you end up with the expression

$$
u_{ij}^{n+1}  -  r \left[u_{i+1,j}^{n+1} - 2u_{ij}^{n+1} + u_{i-1,j}^{n+1}\right]  -  r \left[u_{i,j+1}^{n+1} - 2u_{ij}^{n+1} + u_{i,j-1}^{n+1}\right]  +  \frac{i \Delta t}{2} v_{ij} u_{ij}^{n+1} \\
= u_{ij}^n  +  r \left[u_{i+1,j}^n - 2u_{ij}^n + u_{i-1,j}^n\right]  +  r \left[u_{i,j+1}^n - 2u_{ij}^n + u_{i,j-1}^n\right]  -  \frac{i \Delta t}{2} v_{ij} u_{ij}^n,
$$ (CN_eq1)

where $r \equiv \frac{i \Delta t}{2 h^2}$.


### Problem 2

One of the tricky things when implementing Crank-Nicolson with two spatial dimensions is getting the matrices and all the different indices right. When taking into account our choice of simple boundary conditions, equation {eq}`CN_eq1` can be expressed in matrix form as 

$$
A \,\vec{u}^{n+1} = B \,\vec{u}^{n}.
$$ (CN_eq2)

Here the vector $\vec{u}^n$ (and similarly $\vec{u}^{n+1}$) is a column vector that contains the $u_{ij}$ values for *all the internal points* of the $xy$ grid at time step $n$. In row-form it would look like this:

$$
\vec{u}^n = \left[(u_{1,1}^n, u_{2,1}^n, \ldots, u_{M-2,1}^n), (u_{1,2}^n, u_{2,2}^n, \ldots u_{M-2,2}^n), \ldots, (u_{1,M-2}^n \ldots u_{M-2,M-2}^n)\right].
$$

The parentheses are just added to make it clear where there is a change in the second index $j$. Thus the $\vec{u}$ vectors have length $(M-2)^2$, and the matrices $A$ and $B$ are thus (potentially very large) matrices of size $(M-2)^2 \times (M-2)^2$. 

Now we need some code to help us get this straight in our program:

- Write a code snippet that translates a pair of indices $(i,j)$ into a corresponding single index $k$ that gives the position of $u_{ij}$ in the vector $\vec{u}$.

- Start with $(M-2)=3$ as a concrete example and write a code snippet that can take a number $r$ and two lenght-9 vectors $\vec{a}$ and $\vec{b}$ and produce the following matrices:

  $$
  A = 
  \begin{bmatrix}
  a_0 &  -r  &  0   &  -r   &   0   &  0    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  -r  &  a_1 &  -r  &  0    &   -r  &  0    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  0   &  -r  &  a_2 &  0    &   0   &  -r   &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  -r  &  0   &  0   &  a_3  &   -r  &  0    &  -r  &  0    &  0    \\
  0   &  -r  &  0   &  -r   &   a_4 &  -r   &  0   &  -r   &  0    \\
  0   &  0   &  -r  &  0    &   -r  &  a_5  &  0   &  0    &  -r   \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  -r   &   0   &  0    &  a_6 &  -r   &  0    \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  0    &   -r  &  0    &  -r  &  a_7  &  -r   \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  0    &   0   &  -r   &  0   &  -r   &  a_8  \\
  \end{bmatrix}
  $$

  $$
  B = 
  \begin{bmatrix}
  b_0 &  r   &  0   &  r    &   0   &  0    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  r   &  b_1 &  r   &  0    &   r   &  0    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  0   &  r   &  b_2 &  0    &   0   &  r    &  0   &  0    &  0    \\
  r   &  0   &  0   &  b_3  &   r   &  0    &  r   &  0    &  0    \\
  0   &  r   &  0   &  r    &   b_4 &  r    &  0   &  r    &  0    \\
  0   &  0   &  r   &  0    &   r   &  b_5  &  0   &  0    &  r    \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  r    &   0   &  0    &  b_6 &  r    &  0    \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  0    &   r   &  0    &  r   &  b_7  &  r    \\
  0   &  0   &  0   &  0    &   0   &  r    &  0   &  r    &  b_8  \\
  \end{bmatrix}
  $$

  If you look closely you will see that the matrix structure is based on submatrices of size $(M-2) \times (M-2)$. Make sure your code works for a general value of $(M-2)$, even though we're testing it for the simple case $(M-2)=3$.

- Now you are ready to write a function for your program that, using inputs $M$, $h$, $\Delta t$ and the matrix $V$ as input, can fill two $(M-2)^2 \times (M-2)^2$ matrices $A$ and $B$ according to the above pattern, with

  $$
  a_k &= 1 + 4r + \frac{i \Delta t}{2} v_{ij},\\
  b_k &= 1 - 4r - \frac{i \Delta t}{2} v_{ij}.
  $$

  (Here the $i$ in $i \Delta t$ is again the imaginary unit.)



### Problem 3

When we have the matrices $A$ and $B$, finding the next $\vec{u}^{n+1}$ from the current $\vec{u}^n$ in a time loop can be done in two steps:

  1. Perform the matrix multiplication $B \, \vec{u}^n = \vec{b}$.

  2. Solve the matrix equation $A \, \vec{u}^{n+1} = \vec{b}$ for the unknown $\vec{u}^{n+1}$.

Given what you know about matrix $A$, discuss which approaches might be well-suited to solve $A \, \vec{u}^{n+1} = \vec{b}$. For your code you can either implement a solver yourself or use a built-in solver in Armadillo.


### Problem 4

Write a part of your program that can set up the initial state $u_{ij}^0$ based on the following expression for an unnormalised Gaussian wave packet

$$
u(x,y,t=0) = e^{-\frac{(x-x_c)^2}{2 \sigma_x^2} - \frac{(y-y_c)^2}{2 \sigma_y^2} + i p_x (x-x_c) + i p_y (x-x_c)}.
$$
  
Here $x_c$ and $y_c$ are the coordinates of the centre of the initial wave packet, $\sigma_x$ and $\sigma_y$ are the initial widths of the wave packet in the $x$ and $y$ directions, and $p_x$ and $p_y$ are the wave packet momenta.

Make sure that the initial state $u_{ij}^0$ satisfies the boundary conditions. 

Also, add code that normalizes your initial state such that 

$$
\sum\limits_{i,j} u_{ij}^* u_{ij} = 1,
$$

i.e. that the total probability in our 2D probability function $p_{ij} = u_{ij}^* u_{ij}$ starts out normalized to 1.

```{note}
By requiring that $\sum\limits_{i,j} p_{ij} = 1$, rather than requiring $\sum\limits_{i,j} p_{ij} h^2 = 1$, we interpret $p_{ij}$ as a *probability*, not a probability *density*. That is, $p_{ij}$ is the probability associated with a small grid cell of area $h^2$ centered on $(x, y) = (x_i, y_j)$.
```


### Problem 5

Write a part of your program that initializes the potential $V$. To construct the barriers used for the double-slit (and other configurations) we will simply set the elements $v_{ij}$ of $V$ that correspond to points inside the barriers to some high constant value $v_{ij} = v_0$. As our starting point we will use the following double-slit setup:

- Wall thickness in the $x$ direction: 0.02
- Wall position (centre) in the $x$ direction: 0.5
- Length of the wall piece separating the two slits (the $y$ distance between the inner edges of the two slits): 0.05
- Slit aperture (opening i the $y$ direction): 0.05

(In Problem 9 you will also use single-slit and triple-slit configurations.)


### Problem 6

Put everything together into a program that does (at least) the following:

1. Set the simulation parameters. It may be useful to read some or all of these as command-line input, or from an input file. The main simulation parameters are $h$, $\Delta t$, $T$, $x_c$, $\sigma_x$, $p_x$, $y_c$, $\sigma_y$, $p_y$ and $v_0$. 

2. Set up the potential matrix, $V$. 

3. Set up the initial state matrix, $U^0$.

4. Set up the matrices $A$ and $B$ required by the Crank-Nicolson approach.

5. Run the loop over time steps and store each new state $U^n$. You can either write every new state directly to file during the loop, or store them in memory and write everything to file after the loop. (Armadillo's `cx_cube` might be useful.)



### Problem 7

The total probability ($= 1$) in the probability function $p_{ij} = u_{ij}^* u_{ij}$ should be conserved over time. This is a nice consistency check to make sure your code works as it should.

- First run your simulation with the settings $h = 5\times10^{-3}$, $\Delta t = 2.5\times10^{-5}$, $T = 8\times10^{-3}$, $x_c = 0.25$, $\sigma_x = 0.05$, $p_x = 200$, $y_c = 0.5$, $\sigma_y = 0.05$, $p_y = 0$ and $v_0 = 0$, i.e. without any double-slit barrier.

- Make a plot of the deviation of the total probability from 1.0 as a function of time. (If the deviations are too small to be visible in your plot, consider plotting the data in a different way...)

- Run the simulation again, but now with a double-slit barrier switched on. Use $v_0 = 1\times10^{10}$ and the double-slit configuration from Problem 5, and make the initial state broader in the $y$-direction by setting $\sigma_y = 0.10$.

- Make a similar plot of the deviation of the total probability from 1.0 as a function of time.



### Problem 8

Run your simulation with the following settings: $h = 5\times10^{-3}$, $\Delta t = 2.5\times10^{-5}$, $T = 2.0\times10^{-3}$, $x_c = 0.25$, $\sigma_x = 0.05$, $p_x = 200$, $y_c = 0.5$, $\sigma_y = 0.20$, $p_y = 0$ and $v_0 = 1\times10^{10}$. Use the double-slit configuration from Problem 5.


- Make three colourmap plots that illustrate the time evolution of the 2D probability function given by $p_{ij} = u_{ij}^* u_{ij}$. Use the times $t = 0, 1.0\times10^{-3}, 2.0\times10^{-3}$. (Feel free to make more plots if you want, but at least include these time steps.)

- For the same time steps, also make colourmap plots that show $\text{Re}(u_{ij})$ and $\text{Im}(u_{ij})$.

```{note}
When making the colourmap plots, you may prefer to not use $p_{ij}$ as the $z$ axis (colour) value, but rather some tranformation of $p_{ij}$ like $\sqrt{p_{ij}}$, to more clearly see the structures in the low-probability regions. But regardless of your choice make sure to specify exactly what quantity the values on the colour scale represent.
```


### Problem 9

- Assume that we measure the particle with a detector screen at $x = 0.8$ (spanning the entire $y$ axis) at time $t = 2.0\times10^{-3}$. Using your simulation results from Problem 8, make a plot that shows the detection probability along this screen at this time. Since we assume that we do indeed detect the particle *somewhere* along this line, you should normalise the one-dimensional probability function to sum to 1.0. Or in other words, you should plot $p(y\,|\,x=0.8\,;\,t=2.0\times10^{-3})$, not $p(x,y\,;\,t=2.0\times10^{-3})$ along $x=0.8$.

- Adjust your code to also simulate single-slit and triple-slit experiments. Like for the double-slit case, use slits with aperture 0.05 and use walls of $y$-length 0.05 to separate each pair of slits (in the triple-slit case). For each case, make a plot of the same 1D probability function as above, i.e. $p(y\,|\,x=0.8\,;\,t=2.0\times10^{-3})$.


### Problem X

If you find it useful, feel free to make some animations of your simulation and put links to these in your report! (However, don't overdo it --- your report will be more readable if the reader doesn't have to switch between the report and watching animations all the time.)


<!-- 
### Problem ?

Run your simulation with the following settings **[to be added]** and for a total time of **[to be added]**. Make a plot that shows the probability of detecting the particle in the left half of the box, $Prob(\text{detect particle in region} x < 0.5)$, as a function of time. 
 -->


### Code snippets

Here we might add suggestions for code layout, and some short code snippets.


<!-- 

$$
A = 
\begin{bmatrix}
a_0 & -r  &  0   & 0      &     -r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
-r  & a_1 & -r   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   & -r  &  a_2 & -r     &     0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  -r  & a_3    &     0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
-r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &     a_4 & -r  &  0   & 0      &     -r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &     -r  & a_5 & -r   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  a_6 & -r     &     0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &     0   &  0  &  -r  & a_7    &     0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &   0   &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     -r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &     a_8 & -r  &  0   & 0      &   -r  &  0  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &     -r  & a_9 & -r   & 0      &   0   & -r  &  0      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  a_{10} & -r  &   0   &  0  & -r      & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &     0   &  0  &  -r  & a_{11} &   0   &  0  &  0      & -r      \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     -r  &  0  &  0   & 0      &   a_{12} & -r  &  0   & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   & -r  &  0   & 0      &   -r  & a_{13} & -r   & 0       \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  & -r   & 0      &   0   & -r  &  a_{14} & -r      \\
0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & 0      &     0   &  0  &  0   & -r     &   0   &  0  &  -r     & a_{15}  \\
\end{bmatrix}

$$

 -->
